---
path: "/CS50-02"
date: "2021-12-06"
title: "CS50 Week 2: Arrays"
tags:
  - CS50
  - C
description: "On arrays, strings (or are they?) and functions."
---

- ðŸ”— [Course Website](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2021/weeks/2/)

## Replacing make with clang

- When you run `make hello.c` you get a file called `a.out` (aka assembly output).
- To give it a name yourself: `clang -o hello hello.c`
- To include custom libraries, you have to include them as a header file, but also tell `clang`where to find it: `clang -o hello hello.c -lcs50` (link in the cs50 library)

## What is compiling?

Compiling actually involves four steps:
1. preprocessing - evaluating libraries and imports, basically looking for everything that has a # symbol. The header files include all the prototypes.
2. compiling - translating your code into assembly code
3. assembling - translating assembly code into binary
4. linking - linking all the different files into one

## Debugging

Syntactic errors vs logical errors.
1. using `printf`
2. use `debug50` (a debugger built on the industry standard's tool called GDB - the GBU debugger)
	- make sure to set up breakpoints before running the debugger!
3. rubber duck debugging

## Memory

- think of RAM (random-access memory) as a grid, 1 byte taking one space inside the grid.
- RAM is volatile; it requires electricity to continue powering it
- when you run a program in C, it is running in your RAM
- think of the computer's memory as a grid of bytes

```c
// this is inside CS50 IDE
bool   1 byte (bit wasteful, could be just a bit instead)
char   1 byte
double 8 bytes
float  4 bytes
int    4 bytes
long   8 bytes
string ? bytes
```

## Arrays

- An array is a sequence of values stored in memory back to back to back (aka contiguous).
- Arrays are used to hold values of the same data type.
- Arrays can be multidimensional.
- Array values are passed by reference.

With an array declaration, you need to specify three things:
- type
- name
- size
- e.g. `int scores[3];`

And this is how you pass an array as an input:
```c
// you use square brackets, but no size
// arrays in C do not know how long they are
// so you'll need to pass in length separately
float average(int length, int array[])
```


**What is a (damn, you) segmentation fault ?**

- When you work with data outside of your declared array. For example, you have an array with size 10, but you are accessing the element at position 11.
- Random access is one of the most powerful yet one of the scariest features in C. You can touch, look at, change any memory you want.

ðŸ¤” **What is the difference between conversion, casting, coercion?**

- **Conversion**: either implicitly or explicitly changing a value from one data type to another, e.g. a 16-bit integer to a 32-bit integer.
- **Coercion**: an implicit conversion.
- **Casting**: an explicit type conversion int() or Number()

## String

- a string is an array of characters! (there is no ðŸ¥„!)

How do we know when the string ends?
- `\0` null (terminating) character where you basically "waste" one byte to indicate where the string ends.
- So a `string` with `length` 3, actually takes up 4 bytes.
- And how do you loop over the string's characters (for how long)?:
```c

// since every string end is padded with the NULL char
for (int i = 0; str[i] != '\0'; i++) {}

// can be replaced with strlen
// make sure to include the <string.h> header
for (int i = 0, len = strlen(str); i < len; i++) {}
```

**Food for thought ðŸ¤”**
- The whole point of programming ultimately is to abstract those lower-level implementation details.

## Command-line arguments

- `argc`: argument count. The program's name is by default, the first argument
- `argv`: argument vector (vector is another word for `array`), is an array of strings. The first element `argv[0]` is always the name of the program. The last element is always stored at `argv[argv-1]`
- By default, `main` returns 0.


```c
int main(int argc, string argv[])
{
  printf("hello, %s\n", argv[1]);
}
else
{
  printf("hello, world\n");
}

```

## Exit status

- 0 in computer speak typically means all ok ðŸ‘: `return 0`
- you can return a custom value (in case of errors or any results you want to keep track of): e.g.  `return 1`
- to check the exit status of a program you just ran: `echo $?`

## Functions

- synonyms: procedures, methods, subroutines
There are three parts in a function declaration:

1. return type
2. name
3. the argument list (comma-separated, with a type and a name)

ðŸ¤” **What is the difference between function declaration vs function definition?**

`float sum_two (int a, int b);`

```c
// the definition (aka the actual recipe)
float sum_two (int a, int b)
{
  int result =  a + b;
  return result;
}
```

- Functions can have 0 (`void`) arguments or no output (also `void`).
