---
path: "/CS50-08"
date: "2021-12-19"
title: "CS50 Week 8: HTML, CSS, JavaScript"
tags:
  - CS50
  - html
  - css
  - javascript
description: "What is the Internet and how does it work?"
---

- 🔗 [Course Website](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2021/weeks/8/)

## The Internet

- a network of networks of computers communicating (i.e., transferring data) with one another
- **Routers**: specialized computers with CPUs and memory, whose purpose is to relay data across cables or wireless technologies, between other devices on the internet.
- **Protocols** are a set of standard conventions that the world has agreed upon for computers to communicate with.

### TCP/IP

- TCP/IP are two protocols for sending data (packets) between two computers
- **IP** stands for internet protocol that dictates the standard way for computers to address each other.
- IP addresses are unique addresses for computers connected to the internet
- Routers have, in their memory, a table mapping IP addresses to cables each connected to other routers, so they know where to forward packets to.
- **DNS**, domain name system translates domain names to IP addresses. DNS is generally provided as a service by the nearest internet service provider, or **ISP**.
- **TCP**, transmission control protocol, allows a single server, at the same IP address, to provide multiple services through the use of a port number (e.g., 80 for `HTTP`, 442 for `HTTPS`)
- TCP also provides a mechanism for resending packets if a packet is somehow lost and not received.
- A large amount of data, such as a picture, will be broken into smaller chunks so that the packets are all of a similar size (they also have to be numbered, e.g.,: 1/2, 2/2).
- **Net neutrality** refers to the idea that these public routers treat packets equally, as opposed to allowing packets from certain companies or of certain types to be prioritized.

## HTTP

- the web is just one of the services that run on top of the internet
- HTTP commands: `GET` allows a browser to ask for a page or file, and `POST` allows a browser to send data to the server
- a **url**, or web address, consists of: the protocol (`https` with encrypted content of the packets) + domain name (`google.com`) + hostname (`www` aka world wide web and not a mail or chat server) + `/` requesting the default file (`index.html`)
- `.com` is known as TLD or top-level domain

## HTML

- tells the browser what to display and how (via tags and attributes)
- start a simple server with `http-server`

## CSS

- styling via properties and selectors

## JavaScript

- allows you to write code that is saved on the server but runs in the user's browser (aka client-side)

Instead of `event.preventDefault()` return `false` 🤔

```html
  	<body>
        <form onsubmit="greet(); return false;">
            <input id="name" type="text">
            <input type="submit">
        </form>
    </body>
```

Wait for the dom to be loaded before proceeding with JS (instead of moving the `<script>` tag all the way down).
```js
   document.addEventListener('DOMContentLoaded', function() {
        document.querySelector('form').addEventListener('submit', function() {
            let name = document.querySelector('#name').value;
            alert('hello, ' + name);
        });
    });

```

- 💡the js anonymous function corresponds to python's `lambda`
