---
path: "/CS50-05"
date: "2021-12-13"
title: "CS50 Week 5: Data Structures"
tags:
  - CS50
  - C
description: "Arrays, linked lists, hash tables and tries."
---


- 🔗 [Course Website](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2021/weeks/5/)

**Data structures** are more complex ways to organize data in memory, storing information in different layouts. We'll look at:

- arrays
- linked lists
- hash tables
- tries

## Arrays

- Arrays are contiguous blocks of memory
- Arrays aren't easily resizable

🤔 Garbage values aren't bad - you just don't know what they are.

**Summary**

- insertion is bad:
    a)in the case when the array is not big enough (O(n));
    b)if the array is big enough and we have the index Omega of 1
- deletion is bad
- lookup is great (random access constant time)
- relatively easy to sort
- relatively small size-wise
- stuck with a fixed size, no flexibility

## Linked lists

- C doesn't provide dynamic arrays
- With linked lists, we store the value and some metadata to go along with it (to help keep track of where the next element is)
- meaning that they take up more space than arrays
- values in linked lists also store a pointer to the next value in the list (the last element in the list will have a `NULL` pointer)
- the `.` for accessing a struct property and the `*` (go to the address of) operator are shorthanded into `->`

```c
n->next = NULL;

//instead of
(*n).next = 1;

```

- The nodes can be anywhere in the computer memory - meaning the values are no longer next to one another.

```c
// because this is a self-referential data type
// we need to give it a temp name to use it immediately
// and then return the name we actually want to call it
typedef struct tempNode
{
    int number;
    struct tempNode *next;
}
node;
```

Your newly initialized variable will contain garbage values unless if you set it to `NULL`.

**How do you create a linked list?**

```c
// an empty linked list
node *list = NULL

// We use sizeof(node) to get the right amount of memory to
// allocate, and malloc returns a pointer that we save as n
node *n = malloc(sizeof(node))

// We want to make sure malloc succeeded in getting memory for us
if (n != NULL)
{

// This is equivalent to (*n).number, where we first go to the
// node pointed to by n, and then set the number property.
// In C, we can also use this arrow notation
    n->number = 1;

// Then we need to make sure the pointer to the next node in our // list isn't a garbage value, but the new node won't point to
// anything (for now)
    n->next = NULL;
}
```

But steps involved are:

- dynamically allocate spare memory for a new node
- check to make sure we didn't run out of memory
- initialize the node's val field
- initialize the node's next field
- return a pointer to the newly created node

❗Always insert to the beginning of the list - you already have the pointer to the list's `HEAD`

One of the trickiest things with linked lists is figuring out the order of doing this - you certainly don't want to end up with an orphaned list! When inserting items, always make sure to point to the next item (i.e., previous head) first, before changing the `HEAD` of the list.

🤔 Every time you allocate memory with malloc, you need to check whether that value != NULL before doing stuff to it. Every time you stuff with pointers, you need to check for `NULL` as well

**Tradeoff**: we need to allocate twice as much memory for each element in order to spend less time adding values. We can't use binary search.

**Summary**

- insertion is easy (O(1))
- deletion is easy
- lookup is bad (O(n))
- relatively difficult to sort
- relatively small-size (not as small as arrays)

## Trees

Trees are recursive data structures where each node points to two other nodes,  one to the left (with a smaller value) and one to the right (with a  larger value). Meaning each node has at most two children, or nodes it is pointing to.

```c
typedef struct node
{
    int number;
    struct node *left;
    struct node *right;
}
node;
```

**Tradeoff:** incurred even a larger memory cost - since each node now needs space for a value and two pointers. It can be used as a binary search tree (as long as the data is sorted, of course).
- For insertion into a binary search tree, the running time is O(log n)
- that's because log of n is also the height of the tree.
- You might also need to put some work to keep the tree balanced and logarithmic in height


## Hash table

- Is an array of linked lists
- A hash function is a function that takes as input some string, and it returns an output that is a non-negative integer
- it combines the random access ability of an array with the dynamism of a linked list
- hash tables are bad for ordering or sorting data
- a collision occurs when two pieces of data produce the same hash code (with linear probing, you just add number 1 to the hash code until you find a free space)
- instead, you could use chaining, which uses linked lists (instead of a single value)


**Summary**

- insertion is a two-step process (hash then add)
- deletion is easy
- lookup on average better than linked lists (O(n), in case of playing cards, dividing into 4 buckets n/4, still results in n)
- not great for sorting
- size-wise: bigger than linked list but smaller than a trie



## Tries

- A trie is a tree made up of arrays (of pointers to other nodes).
- Shortname for retrieval 🤷‍♀️, also known as a prefix tree
- Tries combine structures and pointers together to store data in an interesting way
- Unlike with a hash table, there are no collisions, and no two pieces of data (unless they are identical) have the same path
- The data to be searched for in the tie is a roadmap - if you can follow the roadmap until the end, the data exists, otherwise it doesn't.

**Summary**

- insertion: complex (lots of dynamic memory allocation)
- deletion: easy (just free node)
- lookup: fast (almost as fast as arrays, O(1) - constant time)
- already sorted
- size-wise: huge

## Abstract data structures

- Are higher-level constructs that use arrays, linked links, hash tables as building blocks.
- **queue**: works on FIFO (first-in-first-out) and uses enqueue and dequeue for adding and removing values (can be implemented as an array or a linked list)
- **stack**: work as LIFO (last-in-first-out), with pop and push functions
- dictionary: key-value pair (has a table or an array)
- a **dictionary**, where we can map keys to values, such as words, to their definitions. Implemented with a hash table or an array, as always, there's tradeoff between time and space.
