---
path: "/CS50-10"
date: "2021-12-29"
title: "CS50 Week 10: Ethics, Security and AI"
tags:
  - CS50
  - ai
  - security
description: "CS50's finishes strong with a lecture on Ethics. Followed by two shorter lectures on AI and Security."
---

- 🔗 [Course Website](https://cs50.harvard.edu/x/2021/weeks/10/)

## Summary

Summary of the principles covered in the course:
-   computational thinking (aka critical thinking)
-   using algorithms to solve problems: inputs => secret sauce => outputs
-   Is the code any good? use the axes of correctness, design, and style to evaluate.
-   abstraction, using layering to simplify problems (functions!)
-   precision: considering all the possible edge cases when problem-solving

## Ethics

- fake news
- content regulation on social media platforms?

## Security

- keeping someone out of your resources 🕵️‍♀️

### Password strength

When length of password is 4:
- 10 x 10 x 10 x 10 for just digits - 10k options
- 52 x 52 x 52 x 52 for just letters (upper and lower) - around 7 million
- 94 x 94 x 94 x 94 all characters (digits, letters, symbols) - around 78 million

Iterating through all possible passcodes with python:

```python
from string import ascii_letters, digits, punctuation
from itertools import product

for passcode in product(ascii_letters + digits + punctuation, repeat=4):
    print("".join(passcode))
```

If you use an 8-character password instead, it's six quadrillions (six followed by fifteen zeroes) 💡

### Encryption

- Encryption is the scrambling of information so that it can’t be read without a key to decrypt it.
- **End-to-end encryption** means that the messages between the two parties involved are encrypted. So even if we are using a third-party chat or video service, the companies running them cannot decrypt or read the contents of our communications.

## AI

### Decision making

- **Decision tree**: used to represent the logic behind decisions, with questions being asked at each step and further questions or actions based on the answers to each.
- **Minimax** is a game-playing algorithm where every outcome has a value or score, and each player is either trying to maximize or minimize the score.


Pseudocode:
```
if player is X:
    for all possible moves:
        calculate score for board
    choose move with highest score
else:
    for all possible moves:
        calculate score for board
    choose move with lowest score
```

- there are 255,000 thousand possible games of tic-tac-toe
- for chess, only considering the first four moves, there are 288 billion possible games

- **depth-limited minimax**: uses an evaluation function which is used to estimate the expected utility of the game from a given state (limiting the path of branches we follow)

### Search

- The minimax algorithm is one type of search algorithm, where the goal is to find the next move in a game or solution to some problem (e.g., Google maps)
- **depth-first search** (DFS): follows a path, choosing randomly if a choice needs to be made, and going backward only if there are no more choices possible
- **Breadth-first search** : alternate taking each path, one step at a time, like searching outwards from the starting point. This will lead to finding the shortest possible path but also explore many unnecessary paths.
- Both of these are categorized as **uninformed search** - the algorithms don’t have additional information about the problem, apart from the very next steps they can make.

### Heuristics

- In **informed search**: use knowledge about the problem to find solutions more efficiently with heuristics, some way of estimating solutions.
- **Manhattan distance**: the number of squares away from a distance (ignoring any obstacles)
- **Greedy best-first**:  at each fork in the road, pick the path with the best value (e.g., the lowest Manhattan distance)
- **A* search**: pronounced “A star search”, uses both the heuristic value of the path, as well as the distance it has already gone for that path.
- Ideally, you'd look for a heuristic that's easy to calculate

### Machine learning

- **Reinforcement Learning**
- to make this algorithm more efficient, switch between explore (something new) and exploit (what it already knows) actions

E.g., **epsilon greedy approach**:
```
epsilon = 0.10
if random() < epsilon:
    make a random move
else:
    make the move with the highest value
```

- **Genetic learning:** where the fittest organisms survive and evolve over time

```
make initial generation of candidates randomly
repeat until successful:
    for each candidate:
        calculate candidate's fitness
    remove least fit candidates
    make new generation from remaining candidates
```

### Neural networks

- In the human brain, neurons pass signals to one another to perform computations.
- A neural network is a collection of neurons, and we can also simulate them digitally.
- **Deep learning**: refers to the use of these neural networks, combined with linear algebra, to solve some problem (e.g., handwriting recognition)
- The key to these algorithms is a large amount of data that leads to more accuracy
- **Interpretability**, the ability for humans to understand what the neural network is doing to come up with its outputs, is a concern.
